2 1
engines are
From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily. The eagle
has landed.
Nearly [music] six decades after the
United States put men on the moon,
That's one small step for man,
one
giant leap for mankind.
it is returning to that [music] mission.
And today, a major step in that process
will begin [music]
in Florida.
My colleague, [music] Ken Chang, is
there and explains why it is that the
United States wants [music] to go back
to the moon.
It's
>> [music]
>> Wednesday, April 1st.
>> Ken, welcome back to The Daily.
Good to be here again.
So, we always turn to you when something
big and meaningful is happening in
space, and something big and meaningful
is happening today, weather permitting.
So, does the weather permit this big and
meaningful thing to happen on Wednesday?
Hopefully, it looks good. The forecast
says 80% chance that it's going to go,
but that means there's 20% chance that
something doesn't quite clear up. Right.
Okay, those are pretty good odds.
So, start by describing this mission.
This is the first time that anyone's
going close to the moon
in more than 53 years.
>> Wow. Four astronauts are going to be
blasting off from Kennedy Space Center
in Florida, and they're going to head
out to the moon.
They're [snorts] not going to land.
They're just going to swing around the
moon and then head straight back to
Earth and splash down in the Pacific
Ocean 10 days later. And
why? I mean, as you just hinted at, some
50-so years ago, astronauts from the
United States did that very thing. So,
why are we doing it again? So, the goal
this time, in this program which is
called Artemis, is to get people back to
the moon, but also stay there this time.
And so, this program is broken up into
pieces because
it's really hard to land on the moon.
You don't want to do all the hard things
all at once. You want to break up into
pieces, so you do step-by-step. Right.
So, Artemis 1 back in 2022, it sent this
spacecraft to the moon and spent several
weeks there, but without any people
aboard.
>> [snorts]
>> So, that's where it established that the
basic machinery works.
Now, we're on the next step, which is
Artemis 2.
This time, they're including the four
people aboard, and that's critical
because
the main task of this mission is to test
the life support systems.
And it's impossible to test it without
actual people producing carbon dioxide,
producing water and poop and everything
else that you need to clean up.
>> [laughter]
>> Right.
So, that's this mission. Step one was,
can we get an aircraft around the moon?
Step two is, can we get people on this
craft to live?
Yes. The biggest goal for the astronauts
on this mission is to not die. Mhm. And
if Artemis 2 succeeds, NASA [snorts] can
move on to the next steps, which will
lead to attempts to land astronauts on
the moon
in a couple years. Okay, and at this
point, I may sound like a broken record,
but why? I mean, what is the rationale
for trying to do this thing that we did
with great fanfare 50-something
years ago?
What NASA says is that this time, we're
not going to just go there and then
forget about it.
That this will be the first step to
building a moon base,
to A moon base? Yeah. So, that they're
going to start putting a power plant,
some habitats to allow people to stay
there for days, weeks, months. Mhm. So,
at first, it will probably be a
scientific research station, much like
what we have in Antarctica kind of near
the South Pole.
Beyond that, people will start thinking
about
how we can take advantage of the moon's
resources.
They might even start trying to mine
valuable materials that could be found
there,
such as helium-3. And what's helium-3,
and why do we want to mine it on the
moon? So, helium-3 is a light version of
helium,
and it's quite rare on Earth.
It's a little bit more prevalent on the
moon's surface,
and this is a version of helium that
could be very useful in future fusion
reactors.
It's also thought to be useful for
future quantum computers, which
people are very excited about because it
could be used for artificial
intelligence, among other things.
And helium-3 on Earth
costs roughly $3 million a pound.
>> Wow. So, if you can even get a little
bit from the moon, you could probably
make a profit. Right.
So,
what lies in the future is space
research
and potentially some serious commercial
mining.
Yes, they're still speculative, but
there are companies who are planning to
do things along those lines already.
Mhm.
And then there's scientific dreamers who
want to do something like
build a big [music] radio telescope on
the far side of the moon to listen to
the universe. Listen to the universe?
Yes. There's signals from just after the
Big [music] Bang billions of years ago.
But it's hard to do that from Earth
because we've basically made things very
noisy with
TV, cell phone calls, podcasts.
>> [laughter]
>> But on the far side of the moon, you
have the entire thickness of the moon
blocking all that noise. Wow. So, you
can hear the rest of the universe. Wait,
just so I understand,
we can build
>> [music]
>> a giant listening post on the far side
of the moon where it's dead quiet,
and we could hear the ancient sounds of
really the dawn of time itself. Pretty
much. These would be [music] almost the
echoes of the Big Bang. Wow.
And the other thing they want to do is
use the moon as a testing ground for
technologies
that they [snorts] ultimately want to
put on Mars. That would include nuclear
power plants, habitats,
life support systems,
because many of the conditions on the
moon are things you'll ultimately have
to face on Mars as well. So, basically,
we'd use the moon and its conditions and
its gravity to figure out whether
something we eventually
want to have on Mars can first survive
the moon.
Yes. And then there's this romantic
notion of humanity just spreading out
into the solar system. That we're no
longer just confined to one planet, but
we can live elsewhere as well, someday
on a moon colony. Mhm.
But on top of all that, there's also the
geopolitical competition with China.
And of course, we want to do all this
before they do.
Right. If we are to be a multi-planet
species,
Americans would like to be the first.
Yep.
Because the people who are there first
are the ones who make the rules of how
space commerce is conducted,
will have the prime locations on the
moon, and control the resources, and so
on. So, being first means being the one
who's in charge.
Ken, what you have just laid out is a
tremendous vision for the future,
and all of it rests on the shoulders of
four astronauts
>> [music]
>> who are going to be blasting off
toward the moon in a few hours on
Wednesday there in Florida.
True, [music] but that's probably not
what is going to be on their minds.
Remember, their first job is [music]
staying alive. If they don't do that,
then all these dreams are pushed [music]
even farther into the future.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Ken, can you introduce us to these four
astronauts who have all this
responsibility on their shoulders, and
describe the logistics of this 10-day
mission they're embarking on from their
perspective? Yes. Um the commander is
Reid Wiseman.
>> [music]
>> We just need to go execute this mission
and bring a little bit of each of our
own personalities in.
He's a former fighter pilot in the US
Navy. He served in the Middle East on
two deployments.
And he was the head of the astronaut
office before he stepped down, which
allowed him to be assigned to the moon
mission. Mhm.
I was outside last night, and I was
looking up up at the moon and thinking,
the next time I see this sight, there's
a good chance that we will have been
around the far side and back. And
there's also a point in detail about
him. His wife died a few years ago. Him
going to moon means leaving [music] his
daughters behind for 10 days. Wow.
And so, I hope there's a piece of it
that extends [music] beyond human space
flight as well. Victor Glover, he's also
a former naval aviator. 10 years [music]
from now when the next challenging thing
happens, maybe we can look back on this
and go, "Hey guys, remember we did that?
>> [music]
>> We we had our own moonshot, remember?
And and it was global. It was
international. And we did it together."
He was the first black man to serve an
extended stay on the space station. And
now he'll be the first black man to go
to the moon. Hm. Next is Christina Koch.
None of us can be as big as what we're
asked to do,
>> [music]
>> but we can contribute the part and bring
our best selves and come together
[music] to do it.
She's an electrical engineer by
training.
And she actually worked on NASA missions
on the ground before she was selected by
NASA to become an astronaut. And she now
holds the record for the longest single
space flight by a woman of 328 days. So,
that's almost a full year.
>> [music]
>> All these um all things that we talk
about first are really not about any one
individual's accomplishment, but more
about celebrating where we are at. And
finally, there's Jeremy Hansen.
He's the Canadian on the crew. You can't
fix all the problems in the world, but
you can influence uh the little bit
around you. It'll be the first time that
a non-American has gone to deep space.
We don't know the ripple effects of what
we're about to do, but we can do it well
to best of our ability and have joy
while we're doing it, and hopefully that
will make a small contribution.
And he has a sense of humor about this.
He said, "If something goes wrong on
this mission, then NASA can blame
Canada."
>> [laughter]
[music]
>> Okay, so that is the crew. Talk to us
about their next 10 days as they're
going to experience it, the four of them
together.
So, they'll have a very long day before
launch even.
They'll wake up 8 hours before launch.
They have to get into their space suits.
They'll be driven out to the launch pad.
They'll go up this huge tower and enter
their spacecraft.
It's known as Orion. Then, they'll be
sitting there for about 4 hours until
the countdown clock gets to zero. And 8
minutes later, they'll be in space.
>> Wow. And that first day in space will
also be quite busy.
>> [snorts]
>> They won't immediately go to the moon.
In fact, what they'll do is make two
looping orbits around Earth. And the
reason they're doing that is they want
to take this time to check out every
little system on the spacecraft to make
sure it's working before they make the
decision to fire the engines to send
them off to the moon. Basically, a
couple of test flights. Right. So, after
day two when they fire the engines to
head to the moon.
The moon is close to a quarter million
miles from Earth. So, it takes a while
to get there. Mhm. Basically, 4 days.
And they'll be spending that all this
time in this capsule which has about as
much space as two mini vans. Two mini
vans? And I say this as a father that
fills basically a minivan. That's not a
lot of space. It's actually a little bit
more than it be on Earth because you get
to float around. So, you can use all the
space above you. It's not quite as
crowded as it would be if you were
driving cross country.
>> [laughter]
>> Right. So, on day six is the big event.
>> [music]
>> This is when they're closest to the
moon.
And
they're not super close. So, the way
NASA describes it, the moon will appear
about the size of a basketball held at
arm's length. Hm. And [music] the moon's
gravity will basically pull them around
the moon.
And
>> [music]
>> they'll go behind the moon. So, that
means they'll lose all radio
communication with Earth for
>> [music]
>> about 40 minutes. And we won't know
what's going on until they emerge on the
other side. And during this [music]
time,
they'll also be making all these
observations of the far side of the
moon. Hm. Such as?
>> [music]
>> So, what's really interesting is that
they will be seeing parts of the far
side of the moon that no human eyes have
seen before. Hm. And that's because the
last time [music] an astronaut passed
over the far side of the moon, it was a
different time of day and those areas
were in darkness. So, that's
fascinating. These astronauts, because
there will be light, will cast their
eyes on parts of the moon that no human
being has ever seen before in actual
daylight. Correct. On the moon, there's
no streetlights. So, the last time an
astronaut [music] passed over these
parts, it was completely dark.
So, can as these astronauts are moving
along the far side of the moon,
you had said that the moon's gravity was
going to be holding them down. How much
power will they have to actually direct
the craft that they're in during this
period? The trajectory that they are on,
NASA designed it
specifically
[laughter]
the moon. So, in that sense, Artemis 2
is kind of the end of an era?
In sense, yes. This expectation is this
will be the last big NASA spacecraft and
rockets. And the future, there will be
much more work from private companies
like SpaceX and Blue Origin.
You know, Ken, just to end this
conversation, it's pretty hard to ignore
the context
of when Artemis 2 is happening right
now. We're in the middle of
a war. And it's big and it's
controversial, and it has had ripple
effects across the entire world.
And I think of space exploration is at
its best this big unifying experience
for the whole world. And this
mission comes at a moment that's not so
unifying.
But if you think back to 1960s when
we went to the moon for the first time,
that was a turbulent era. Especially the
year 1968.
Martin Luther King was assassinated.
Robert Kennedy was assassinated.
The country was mired in the Vietnam
War.
The Democratic convention
[clears throat] in Chicago was beset by
riots.
It was a very unsettled time
in the United States. Mhm. And at the
end of that year,
December of 1968,
The engines are armed. 4 3 2
1 0.
We have commit. We have
>> Apollo 8 launch.
Oh, and the rumble in our building. And
that was the equivalent of Artemis 2.
It's a beautiful takeoff so far.
It was the first launch of [music] the
mighty Saturn 5 rocket that NASA used
then
with people aboard.
And the three astronauts
on Apollo 8,
they went to the moon, orbited the moon,
and on Christmas Eve, We are
now approaching lunar sunrise.
And uh for all the people
back on Earth, the crew of Apollo 8
has a message that we would like to send
to you.
As they were in orbit around the moon,
In the beginning,
God created the heaven and the earth.
The three astronauts took turns reading
Genesis from the Bible.
And the spirit of God moved upon the
face of the waters.
And God said,
"Let there be light."
>> [music]
>> And there was light.
And it was such a
calming, hopeful moment
that
some people even talked about how that
mission saved 1968. Mhm.
So, we don't know what the four
astronauts on Artemis 2 are planning to
say as they are coming back from the
moon.
But still, [snorts]
just the imagery that's going to come
back of them seeing [snorts]
Earth from a quarter million miles away
could just provide a moment of calm that
makes us realize we are still all part
of the same planet and perhaps will just
offer a note of hope
that
maybe
it won't [music] be as turbulent as it
seems right now.
>> [music]
>> Okan, thank you very much. We appreciate
it.
Thank you. I hope it goes off perfectly
later today.
Me too.
And God called the dry land Earth.
And the gathering together of the waters
called he seas.
And God saw that it was good.
And from the crew of Apollo 8,
we close with good night,
good luck,
a merry Christmas,
and God bless all of you,
all of you on the good Earth.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
[music]
On Tuesday afternoon, a federal judge
ordered that President Trump end
construction of his proposed massive
ballroom off the East Wing of the White
House
>> [music]
>> until the project is blessed by
Congress.
The decision delivered the first
meaningful setback to the president's
increasingly bold efforts to redesign
the White House.
And
for the first time since the start of
the war in Iraq,
>> [music]
>> the average price of gasoline across the
United States surpassed $4 a gallon, a
major milestone for consumers. Um not
happy about this and even my customers
are coming in this morning and saying,
"What what happened?
What happened in 24 hours where we went
>> In Jacksonville, Florida, Cam Judy, the
gas station manager we spoke to for
Friday's episode, raised [music] his
prices on Tuesday to $4.29 a gallon.
That's up more than 50% [music] since
the start of the war. Uh and it just
caught everybody off guard, including
myself. So, it's upsetting
and I hope it I hope it doesn't last
long. Prices are expected to remain high
until oil [music] can flow freely
through the Strait of Hormuz.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Alex Stern, Jack Ditsodoro, Rochelle
Banja, [music] and Diana Wynn.
It was edited by Rachel Quester and
contains music by Marion [music] Lozano,
Dan Powell, and Diane Wong.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
Special thanks to Timothy [music] Bella.
That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.